foreign
[Music]
hello everyone I'm Norman Wildberger thanks
for joining me we're going to be looking at
Central poly numbers which I introduced last
time in this context of mset arithmetic very
foundational new approach to arithmetic and
I want to illustrate how these Central poly
numbers which arise naturally this way actually
figure prominently in one of the most important
developments in 20th century mathematics which
is the representation theory of Lie groups in
the simplest non-trivial possible example which
turns out to have huge consequences for physics
in actually a multiple of different areas okay so
this has to do with the characters particularly of
these two very simple Lie groups simple at least
in the sense that they're the simplest ones but
they're still not really very simple called SL2
and SU2 so we're going to talk about them and
um and show you how these Central poly numbers
connect with their characters now this is a
highly technical and you know large area which
usually requires all kinds of months and months of
preparations and learning all kinds of different
things so I'm just going to present a very cut
and dried and basic approach to these things but
nevertheless I'm confident that I'm going to be
able to describe these irreducible representations
of SL2 in in a way that you probably are not able
to find anywhere else okay so I'm going to
give you what I think is a really good way
of thinking about these things that really cuts
to the chase and it's very novel as far as I know
and I've been working in representation
theory on and off for for many decades
today's lecture is going to be a little bit
different from usual because I'm going to have
my talking on the board like I do here but I'm
also going to augment that with some hands-on
illustration with a computer so I'm going to
take you so like we're in a coffee shop and
we're going to sit down together and I'm going to
explain how to understand the representations of
these groups in a very direct and concrete way
so we're really going to get our hands right on
the objects themselves and for that I'm going to
switch to Scientific workplace so you're going to
see me do some manipulations and it's going to
be a more dynamic thing if you like that kind
of thing all right then on the Wild Egg Maths
YouTube channel you can become a member and you
can find dozens many dozens of videos around
a whole range of topics where I get into the
details and roll up my sleeve and start doing some
mathematics in front of you and you can sort of
do that with me and there will be things things
for you to do alongside of that so the Central
poly numbers or maybe Central integral poly
numbers C0 is one C1 is Alpha to the minus 1 plus
Alpha C2 is Alpha minus two plus one plus Alpha
squared C3 equals Alpha minus 3 plus Alpha minus
1 plus Alpha plus Alpha cubed and what you should
think about is having a sequence of densities
spaced two apart symmetrically arranged around
zero on the basically the integral number line
and in terms of these sort of more elementary
symmetric polynomials B sub n defined by Alpha
to the minus n plus Alpha to the N so just a
single Delta function here and single Delta
function there is symmetric about zero this
is B1 this is one plus B2 this is B1 plus B3
okay so those are the actual algebraic objects
that we want to connect with and now I'm going
to move to a seemingly very different
area of mathematics this story of Lie
groups representation theory and we're going to
concentrate on the two or three simplest examples
which are not abelian really which is the simplest
so-called simple examples okay so SL2 so for us
that's going to be matrices of the form a b c d
so two by two matrices whose determinant is one
and an important question is what are
these numbers here where do they come from
so for us we are not able to say the real numbers
because we don't believe in infinite decimals we
don't believe that there are equivalence classes
of Cauchy sequences so obeying some mystical
thing that that takes you infinite amounts of
time and effort to check okay that's a fantasy
so we want to ground ourselves so the numbers
here are going to be rational numbers that's one
story but another story which is also really
important for the situation is when we look
at complex numbers and for us a complex number is
something in the form X plus I Y where X and Y are
rational numbers so we might say rational complex
numbers but I'm just going to say complex numbers
because we're not going to consider these real
complex numbers that people like to dream about
when they're talking about algebraically closed
fields there's no such thing in this context okay
so that's SL2 now a closely related group first
of all this is a group okay in the sense that you
can multiply two of them and you get another one
of the same kind the identity matrix is obviously
this kind and inverses of such things are also
contained here so this is a group that has a kind
of continuous nature because these rational
numbers can be chosen sort of continuously
okay now there's a closely related group called
SU2 which is very important for example it's the
group that appears in the middle of the standard
model story standard model U1 cross SU2 cross SU3
particle physics the SU2 there is responsible
for symmetries having to do with a weak force
okay that's this SU2 so it's also two by two
matrices but now the entries are complex numbers
okay and there are the form Alpha Beta minus beta
bar Alpha bar where the bar represents the usual
complex conjugate but with the condition that the
determinant is one that's what the S stands for
determinant is one and that determinant condition
is that Alpha times Alpha bar plus beta times beta
bar equals one now it's quite obvious that that
this SU2 group can be thought of as contained in
this SL2 group here when considered with
complex entries okay so this thing here
is a subgroup of SL2 over the complex numbers
this thing here has an alternate aspect as the
three-sphere okay so it's also considered as the
three-dimensional sphere in four-dimensional space
and it's a compact Lie group so it's bounded it
doesn't go off it's completely contained in some
finite region of space finite in volume and so
this is a very important group having to do with
spherical harmonics yeah hydrogen atom and of
course the standard model so these are closely
connected and we're going to be interested in the
representations of them so I have to tell you what
that means as well okay so I want to introduce
the idea of a representation to you and briefly
you know what associated characters are in the
context of these relatively simple Lie groups
which are for us groups of matrices that's my
preferred way of thinking about Lie groups so
what is a representation well it's a homomorphism
of some group into matrices okay that seems funny
because we're starting with a group of matrices
yes but we're asking here's this this group of
matrices how can we otherwise also represent it
with matrices perhaps in some quite different way
okay so that's not a question that may that
you know maybe a first will strike you if
you're starting this subject but after a while
you start realizing there's all all kinds of
reasons why this is a good kind of question to
ask so I'm going to try to illustrate things by
sticking to the example of SL2 okay that will
be our basic group although we'll we'll talk
a little bit about GL2 also later but SL2 group
of two by two matrices determinant one condition
and we're flexible at this stage whether we're
talking about rational entries or complex entries
okay so what do we mean by a homomorphism it
means that we want to assign to any one of these
things another matrix say Pi of G and we want that
assignment to have the property that Pi of G times
H so if you take the product of the element G and
the element H in this group it's another element
of the group and you consider the Pi of that that
you're getting the product of Pi G times Pi of H
because these are all matrices right so you can
multiply these two matrices and hopefully you get
that one that's the basic homomorphism property
and okay the identity in the group should go
to the identity matrix and inverses should go
to inverse matrices okay but it's really this
property here which is the essential one so here
are some examples so the first three of a whole
family of examples of representations of SL2 the
group SL2 and it turns out that up to a pretty
natural notion of equivalence this is going to be
a complete list of the irreducible representations
of this group now I'm maybe not going to say what
that means you can just think about it irreducible
meaning that it doesn't break up in some kind of
obvious way as a sum of smaller representations
this is a way of kind of taking two of
representations and sort of putting them together
in a kind of an obvious way we want to exclude
that all right so the first representation is very
trivial we'll call it Pi zero it just sends every
element in the group to the one by one matrix
which has a one in it so the one by one identity
matrix well it's kind of obvious that it satisfies
this sort of trivially but still that's that's a
representation and it it plays an important role
actually okay the next representation is not
much harder to come up with we'll call it Pi
one of G we're going to send this element here to
the matrix which is itself so Pi one of G is a b
c d this is indeed a matrix so yes indeed that's
a homomorphism from SL2 into matrices and sort of
obviously satisfies this property okay so now we
come to the first new non-trivial one Pi 2 of G
and it's a three by three matrix have a look at
it okay so we're starting with this matrix here
and we're going to send this matrix to this matrix
a squared 2A b b squared okay that's just binomial
kind of expansion c squared 2cd D squared down on
the bottom these these two rows here are pretty
simple actually on the sides pretty easy two a
squared a c c squared B squared B D D squared the
only curious one is perhaps the central element
which is a d plus b c and it's a great exercise to
check that this thing here has the property that
if you take two matrices of this kind Okay g and
H and you look at the corresponding matrices
three by three matrices for each one of them
that the product of those three by three
matrices will be the matrix corresponding
to the product of the two two by two matrices that
you started with that's the homomorphism property
okay so that's the first sort of non-trivial
non-obvious representation of SL2 but we're
claiming that it's really just the start here of a
family keeping on going where in fact the sizes of
the matrices increased one by one as we go okay
the next one in the pattern is Pi 3 of G which
is this four by four matrix again we see sort of
binomial expansion here and here and these ones
here on the sides are also relatively predictable
this one B three B squared D B D squared D cubed
you know decreasing powers of B increasing powers
of D Etc same thing over here and in the middle
we have these entries here which are all sort of
similar a squared D plus two ABC and then variance
of that and we claim that this particular 4x4
matrix if we associate it to the two by two matrix
a b c d that mapping sending a b c d to this
thing here that's a homomorphism that's the key
property take two two by two matrices and multiply
them look at the images of all three of those
matrices then you're going to get a corresponding
multiplicative relationship between the images
foreign so some obvious questions how do you get
these patterns like how did I come up with this
I don't want to just present it as a rabbit out
of a hat here's some crazy formula and it seems to
work sort of magically so you know where do these
things come from okay so that's the first question
the second question is what's the pattern in other
words if we stared at these things and asked well
what's going to be Pi sub 4 what's going to be
Pi sub 12 can we predict the form of that thing
because it seems as if there's some kind
of pattern after all the the top rows are
are predictable we we know what the top row of the
next one is going to be what about the whole thing
so I want to address that and I'm going to give
you a highly novel answer to that right which I
think uh is is really instructive for students
of Lie theory and students of modern physics I
I would have loved that somebody had told me what
I'm going to tell you uh shared that with me when
I was a first-year graduate student that would
have just like opened my mind to a whole better
way of thinking about things okay and a final
question well where are the characters what do
we mean by characters and where do the Central
poly numbers come in because after all we want
to connect it with these Central poly numbers all
right so we're going to do that now and I'm going
to shift to Scientific workplace I'm going to
roll up the sleeves and sit down with me grab
a coffee and let's dig into the details here all
right great so here is Scientific Workplace and
we're going to go through some material I'm going
to repeat a few things that I've already said and
then we're going to strike out and understand
these representations in a really good way
so GL2 consists of the invertible 2x2 matrices a
b c d just invertible meaning the determinant is
non-zero there's the identity matrix and it's a
multiplicative group under matrix multiplication
SL2 is a subgroup of GL2 consisting of
those matrices whose determinant is one
and we want to discover some other
representations of these groups in
other words realizations as matrices and the
most trivial one we've already talked about
Pi zero where we send a general matrix a b c d
say in GL2 to the matrix one by one matrix one
the two by two matrix comes about well one
way of thinking about it is that it's really
corresponding to the action of two by two
matrices on a vector vector X Y so if you
multiply the column vector X Y by a b c d you get
a X plus b y c x plus d y so this two dimensional
representation that way group theorists sometimes
think about this is that it's a case of acting on
on a two-dimensional space in this case space of
column vectors well in this case the the action
is just giving us the matrix back so Pi one of a
b c d is a b c d fine but the the beauty of this
approach is that we can think about X Y as being
linear polynomials on some two-dimensional space
okay in terms of poly numbers Alpha and Beta the
standard poly numbers in the plane and then what
we do is we think about extending this action to
an action on homogeneous polynomials of a given
degree so we have an action on linear polynomials
X and Y but now we want to bump that up to an
action of the same group on first quadratic
polynomials and then cubic polynomials and
so on and it's exactly that procedure that turns
out to give all the irreducible representations
for SL2 so to illustrate that let's look at the
story on quadratic polynomials so we're talking
about homogeneous quadratic polynomials in the
plane so they are spanned by x squared X Y and Y
squared so there are three such quadratic polys in
a basis and the way our group is going to act on
this is going to send this vector to essentially
sort of the analog of the what happened to X Y so
X was sent to ax plus b y y is sent to CX plus d y
we're just going to replicate those and replace x
squared X Y and Y squared with the corresponding
expressions in these two quantities ax plus b y
and CX plus d y so here we have ax plus b y
squared on the top here's ax plus b y times
CX plus d y in the middle and CX plus d y squared
on the bottom okay we expand that out we get this
and then we see that the elements here are just
linear combinations of x squared X Y and Y squared
so for example this top entry is a squared times
x squared plus 2A B times x y plus b squared y
squared that means we can write this as a product
of a three by three matrix times the original
column vector x squared x y y squared okay
so that illustrates how the three by three
matrix comes about it comes about
because we're acting on quadratic
polynomials in the plane rather than the linear
polynomials that we sort of started out with
so we get a three-dimensional representation we're
calling it Pi two you can think of the two as sort
of corresponding to the quadratic degree of the
polynomials that we're looking at and so Pi 2
of a b c d is it's three by three matrix whose
entries are all quadratic in the elements a b
c and d and then the exercise I've already given
you to check that this is really a homomorphism
that it does really satisfy this homomorphism
property now there's a kind of an interesting
variant that I'll just mention as an aside
that some of you might like to just pursue if
we chose instead the binomial basis just made
a slight change of basis by replacing the X
Y with 2xy that's not unreasonable also
because that's also rather natural basis
so then go through the same procedure and show
that the the three by three matrix that you
get looks a lot like this one except that well
things are sort of reversed instead of having two
coefficients up here and here and one coefficients
here and here other things are reversed
okay so let's go a while further now to the
next higher degree cubic polynomials now we have
the basis consisting of X cubed x squared Y X Y
squared and Y cubed and then we do the same thing
we just replace the X with ax plus b y and the Y
with c x plus d y and expand all four terms out
everything is homogeneous it's all degree
three in total so each of the elements can
be written as a combination of the original
monomials x cubed x squared Y X Y squared y
cubed and when we write it out as a product
of the matrix we get this four by four matrix
so this thing here this top term here for example
a cubed x cubed 3A squared B times x squared y 3
a b squared times x y squared and B cubed times
y cubed and the interior ones are a little bit
more complicated so this gives us then a four
dimensional representation that Pi 3 of a b c d
equals this this matrix here and if you
think about the homomorphism property is
more or less sort of pretty evident because
of the the way that we're acting on on these
polynomials is an extension of the linear action
on the on the plane to corresponding action on
a homogeneous polynomial space okay so now we
have four examples Pi zero was that one there
Pi one is just so the defining representation and
then here is Pi 2 acting on quadratic polynomials
and now we've just calculated Pi 3 acting on
cubic polynomials and the natural question is
how do we how do we extend this when we know
how to extend it in in some sense we know
that the next step will just be that we do the
corresponding thing with quartic polynomials but
can we predict beforehand sort of what the matrix
is that we're going to get instead of having to
make those substitutions and then all that big
expansion okay that's that's the question and so
now I'm going to do something which those of you
who are members of the Wild Egg Maths channel will
have seen me do quite a few times before it's one
of my favorite sort of linear algebraic techniques
it's to perform an LU factorization where
we try to express a given square matrix
as a product of a lower triangular
matrix and an upper triangular matrix
this is a very powerful linear algebraic tool and
it's also a rational tool in other words does not
involve any irrationalities like some other tools
do so let's let's do that okay um oh the trace by
the way the traces of these matrices are also
very interesting we'll talk a little bit more
at the end but you might um those of you want
to explore you might see if you can figure out
what the traces of these matrices are traces being
the sum of the diagonal elements okay so let us do
this LU factorization so in Scientific Workplace
I get to do that pretty easily I go to compute
here matrices and then PLU decomposition
okay it also gives me a permutation matrix
in general it's it's the identity but not always
so okay but the identity doesn't make any effect
so it's just the product of this lower triangular
with this upper triangular so at the first glance
it doesn't look that appealing so let's have a
look at these two individual components the lower
triangular matrix first all right first thing
I'm going to do is I'm going to simplify this
oh that was good so this term here
which looked a little bit complicated
turns out to be simple it's just 2 C over
a here was C over a here was C over a
squared so this lower triangular
piece is very easy and pleasant
what about this upper triangular one
it's definitely more imposing looking
so let's have a look at that so let
us first of all simplify this thing
okay that's that's first of all a lot
simpler but crucially we see that this a
D minus b c term appears in three of the
places here here and here so if now if
our matrix G belongs to SL2 then this simplifies
more okay so up till now we were just taking an
arbitrary invertible matrix an element of GL2
but now we see the the real possible advantages
in restricting ourselves to the subgroup
the special linear subgroup because then
a D minus B C equals one so since a D minus B C
equals one that's the defining property we get
this thing here becomes well we just
get to eliminate these these things so
that becomes a one this thing disappears
and this one squared also disappears and
now we get a matrix that looks well on the
face of it pretty much like this one it's
a triangular matrix except it's a little bit more
complicated because the diagonal elements are not
um are not one so I'm going to do something
further here I'm going to decompose this a
little bit further I want to extract the
diagonal part okay so what's the diagonal
part uh let me just make these things zero
delete them and replace them with zero
and I'll replace this thing to zero okay so
that's the diagonal part so if I take this
thing here okay and I I sort of multiply by
the inverse of the diagonal part momentarily
I'm going to get this thing and that tells me that
this thing here that I that I got can now
be rewritten as because if you look at this
thing here is the same as this matrix here I
can now rewrite bring this to the other side
I can write it as the product of undo that sorry
copy that I the product of this diagonal matrix
with this strictly upper triangular matrix
with ones on the diagonal a nilpotent matrix
okay so what have we done so we have now uh I will
fast forward here a little bit here is a theorem
if a is not equal to zero okay there's A's in the
denominators here right so um if a is equal to
zero then this is not going to be valid but if a
is not equal to zero then with the condition that
a D minus B C equals one in other words if we're
in the special linear group case then we can write
this thing here in terms of an LU factorization
here is the L and here is the U we're at
simplified things a little bit by replacing C over
a which appeared that was I remind you that was
the term that appeared here in the lower part it
was a C over a in all three places so if we call
that Z then I just get one z z squared 2z over
there that's the lower part and then the upper
part if I replace W say is B over a then I get
rid of these B arrays and I get some simplify
I think we get the diagonal part A squared 1 1
over a squared times this upper triangular part
okay so I claim this is a quite a pleasant
story and it allows us to see a pattern okay
because if we look at this matrix here we see
pretty well something that's very close to my
heart which is a Harriet Pascal matrix slightly
modified so if we just look at the coefficients
we have 1 1 1 1 2 1 it's like a binomial sort of
expansion matrix Pascal matrix if you like but I
like to call it Harriet Pascal a matrix so this
is very close to this Harriet Pascal story which
seems to be appearing wherever we look okay in
a lot of my investigations but in any case and
so over here it's sort of something similar
but sort of flipped over on the other side
let's have a look to see if the same kind
of thing happens with the four-dimensional
representation when we're acting on cubic
polynomials so I'm not going to go through
the details but I strongly urge those of you
who are interested to get out your favorite
algebraic program and or maybe you can even do
it by hand actually it's not impossible at all
and to check that the following is is true
that if we have this condition a D minus B C
equals one and maybe I should just illustrate
that okay let me just do the LU decomposition
um matrices l u okay there it is there
I'm going to get rid of this thing here
that's just the identity um so these
are a pretty much more onerous now so
no problem so let's do that
and let me simplify this
okay you see simplification we
get one one one one two one one
three three one the coefficients here
are definitely Harriet Pascal matrix
okay what about this upper triangular thing
uh here this big thing looks more onerous
but here okay you can't see it all neither
can I but I'm going to simplify this
isn't that a lovely thing okay
the simplification again you see
these a D minus b c factors so if
I just get rid of them by setting
so this is assuming that a D minus B C equals one
so now we are we're supposing that we are in the
special linear group here and
all these little terms disappear
what happened through the 2B oh yes because I
haven't yet divided by the um the a cubed so
if I take then this a cubed a 1 over a 1 over a
cubed to factor out as I did before then we end
up with a story that looks like this okay um
we get uh pretty well exactly the same thing
as I did previously this this representation
matrix is then a product of a lower triangular
which is pretty predictable it's four by four
basically one of our Harriet Pascal matrices
and uh and over here the same kind of story
we've got this diagonal part and then sort of
a reverse Harriet Pascal thing up here and the
point is that now we are in a position to to
generalize this we can see what the pattern
is this LU decomposition has cleared the air
has revealed the underlying structure okay now
there's quite a lot more to be said here about
this this connects with the famous decomposition
called the N A N Bar decomposition of simple Lie
groups Etc but let me just just show you what
the the quartic polynomial story looks like so
there's there's a thing there and there's
the the five by five matrix that appears
there and you can check that a similar kind of
thing is happening is here and so the the four
dimensional the Pi four representation looks
like this and so just to wrap it up now I want
to bring this now full circle to see where it is
that these Central poly numbers figure so let's
deal with this biggest one okay which this five by
five matrix let's call this matrix P of a b c d so
this is Pi sub 4 of the the two by two matrix a b
c d okay so we define this thing here okay and now
I'm going to switch to SU2 so we haven't talked
about SE2 very much but SU2 is another subgroup
of well it's a subgroup of SL2 but a subgroup
of SL2 where the coefficient says as I mentioned
before are complex numbers and the the diagonals
in SU2 so SU2 is really like a three-sphere and
and the diagonal sort of correspond to a circle
so they correspond to matrices of the form a 0 0
a inverse where a is a unit complex number so it
looks a lot like the unit circle okay so in this
case here we can evaluate what the corresponding
matrix would look like if we just looked at these
more special diagonal matrices so we plug in a
b c d is a 0 0 a inverse and we get this very
pleasant diagonal matrix with entries a to the
fourth a squared one a to the minus two and a to
the minus four and its trace which is just the sum
of the diagonal elements is exactly our Central
integral poly number C sub 4 and that's how
the characters of the representations of SU2
or indeed SL2 connect directly with these Central
integral polynomials C sub n and that's why the
algebra of these things is particularly important
because this is this whole story that I'm showing
you here is really just the tip of the whole Lie
simple Lie algebra simple Lie group iceberg and
so there's you know massive generalizations of
what's going on here but this is sort of the the
simplest and core example of well but we'll see
next time is really the vile character formula
which in my view is really the most important
formula in all of 20th century mathematics
I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
foreign